The Project Gutenberg eBook of Stories of Christmas and the Bowie
knife, by J. Frank Dobie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Stories of Christmas and the Bowie knife

Author: J. Frank Dobie

Illustrator: Warren Hunter

Release Date: October 26, 2022 [eBook #69245]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell, David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF CHRISTMAS AND THE
BOWIE KNIFE ***





  Stories of Christmas
  and the Bowie Knife

  [Illustration]




  Stories of
  Christmas
  and the
  Bowie Knife

  BY _J. Frank Dobie_

  ILLUSTRATED BY _Warren Hunter_

  The Steck Company       Austin, Texas




  Copyright 1953 by
  THE STECK COMPANY, PUBLISHERS
  Austin, Texas

  All Rights Reserved

  PRINTED AND BOUND IN THE U.S.A.




Preface


In wanting to bring you a distinctively different Christmas greeting
for 1953--as well as one that is typically Texan--The Steck Company
turned quite naturally to Texas’ most distinguished folklorist, J.
Frank Dobie. His writings of the past quarter century have turned
the attention of people in many lands to the rich folklore of the
Southwest. Dobie’s recollections of three boyhood Christmases begin
this volume. As an added fillip, his colorful story of the Bowie knife
is included.

Warren Hunter, one of Texas’ outstanding artists, has provided striking
illustrations that catch the spirit of the stories and recall days
quite remote from the modern scene, yet separated from us by only a few
decades.

Thus, with a glance backward, The Steck Company brings you warm
greetings for the 1953 season. In the words of Dobie, “Generous
feelings and cheering words are never trite. Merry Christmas!”




[Illustration: Christmas and Remembrance]




1


It is a benediction of nature that generally we remember more vividly
and oftener what has given us happiness rather than what has given us
pain. Christmas in particular is the time for recollecting, and now I
am recollecting Christmases even more remote in character from modern
Christmases than they are in time.

We lived on a ranch twenty-seven horse miles from our “shopping
center.” That was Beeville, Texas, which later became the family
home. Three or four times a year a wagon went to town and hauled out
supplies, but the biggest haul was just before Christmas.

As I look back, those days seem to have been days of great
plenitude--not because of anything like family prosperity, for we lived
meagerly, but because of the necessity of local stockpiling. Sugar came
in barrels, molasses in kegs or big jugs, flour in barrels or in tiers
of 48-pound sacks, beans and coffee in bushel sacks (the coffee to be
roasted and ground), lard in 50-pound cans, tomatoes, salmon, and other
canned goods in cases. Then at Christmas time there was a large wooden
bucket of mixed candy--enough for us six children, for our visiting
cousins, and for the children of several Mexican families living on the
ranch, most of them farmers. Each of these families received also a new
blanket and a sack of fruit.

We had home-made candy not infrequently, but Christmas was the only
time of year when it snowed candy. There were no chocolates, as I
recollect--just a mixture of lemon drops and an assortment of variously
shaped hunks of sugar, both hard and gummy, variously colored, alloyed,
and flavored, with peppermint being dominant.

Christmas was also distinguished by apples, oranges, raisins (on
stems), almonds, walnuts, pecans, and a coconut or two. We ate some
of the coconut as broken out of the shells, but its main function was
to be grated and mixed with sliced oranges and sugar into ambrosia--as
inevitable for Christmas dinner as turkey is for Thanksgiving. Nobody
then dreamed of having fruit every morning for breakfast. Oranges,
apples, raisins, and nuts were put into stockings and hung on Christmas
trees. They were a rare treat.

These fruits and nuts left a stronger impression on my mind than
all other gifts associated with childhood Christmases except books,
firecrackers, Roman candles--and my first new saddle. There were tin
bugles, toy trains, and dolls for the girls, but we--the boys, at
least--had so much fun making our own toys that no bought toy has left
any impression on my memory. Christmas was the time for new pocket
knives, and very useful they were. My father taught us to whittle
water-wheels, which could be run only when an occasional rain made
Long Hollow run. The axle for the wheel might be a piece of wood or a
section of dried cornstalk, less durable but much more easily fitted
with paddles than hard wood. The toy bugles would not split the air as
brightly as cane whistles whittled out of an old fishing pole.

We may have had colored balloons at some Christmas, but I recollect
only the ones made from bladders. Hog-killing time is cold weather.
The chief prize for us from every hog and every calf, cow, or steer
butchered was the bladder. A human mouth was the only air-pump for
blowing up this home-contrived balloon. Held, air-expanded, near a
fire, it would keep on expanding until the material was very thin and
dry. Then came the climax--an explosion. Nobody wanted to part with his
bladder-balloon, but that grand explosion could not be resisted.

I never heard of Fourth of July fireworks until I was nearly grown.
Firecrackers and Roman candles were as much a part of Christmas as
ambrosia. The firecrackers could be set off by day, but the Roman
candles were for darkness, when everybody watched the pyrotechnics.
They vanished all too quickly, like most other beautiful things--but
not from the great reality called memory.

[Illustration]

There were toy pistols and airguns, but a new pair of rubbers for a
nigger-shooter gave just as much satisfaction. At one time we got
more satisfaction from lead bullets gouged out of live oak trees than
from any other form of shooting. Our house was on the edge of a grove
of scores of live oak trees, some of them very large and old. When
Uncle Ed Dubose, my mother’s half brother, came in the fall to hunt and
again at Christmas time with all the family, he freely spent ammunition
perfecting his marksmanship. His targets were tree trunks. He was
an indefatigable treasure-hunter also, but he never found a bonanza
comparable to that he left us children in the form of lead.

From it, from solder melted off tin cans, and from now and then a haul
of babbitt found in wornout windmills, we minted dollars. We melted
our metal in a large iron spoon over an outdoor fire and poured the
liquid into a round wooden bluing box, wherein it quickly cooled and
solidified. (Bluing for laundry in those days came in powdered form,
for dissolving in water--in wooden boxes, with tops that screwed on,
about the diameter of a dollar.) This free coinage was limited only by
the supply of crude metal. The more canned goods we consumed and the
more old bullets we could find, the higher the rate of coinage. The two
principal uses the dollars had were for pitching--into holes in the
ground--and for buying cattle, horses, sheep, and goats from each other.

Each of us had a play ranch enclosed by miniature fences--twine (our
barbed wire) strung on sticks stuck into the ground like posts. Our
cattle were tips of horns that had been sawed off cattle at the chute
in the big picket cowpens about a hundred yards from the house. Our
horses were spools from which my mother and neighbors had used the
thread in endless sewing; our goats were empty snail shells; our sheep
were oak galls. Sheep and goats were very plentiful and, therefore, had
a low value; cattle and horses were harder to come by.

With running irons made of baling wire and heated red hot in a fire,
we branded the cattle, sheep, and horses, but could not brand the
snail-shell goats. We made long trains of flat rectangular sardine
cans, coupled together by pieces of wire, to haul the stock from ranch
to ranch. Our dog, Old Joe--named after Beautiful Joe, the wonderful
hero of a favorite book--made a very unsatisfactory engine to pull
the freight train. We hitched green lizards, snared with the hair of
horsetail, to a single sardine can or to a cardboard matchbox that
served as a wagon. Lizards never make tractable teams.

This ranching, with all of its ramifications, was not primarily
Christmas play. It went on more in the summer than in the winter, but
no Christmas toys could compete with it. Certain Christmas books added
to prolonged play.

We children always knew positively that there would be books on the
Christmas tree or in our stockings. We always wanted particular titles,
and we had the before-Christmas pleasure of speculating on what known
and unknown books Santa Claus might bring. I don’t remember what
Christmas it was that _Ivanhoe_ came to make knights of us boys. Old
Stray, an irritatingly gentle horse that could hardly be forced out
of a walk, enriched the flowering of our knighthood. _Swiss Family
Robinson_ made us into cave-dwellers. We dug our own cave into the bank
of Long Hollow, some distance below the house.

I wasn’t yet reading when for Christmas I received an illustrated book,
with a linen cover, about an owl that hooted. On demand my father read
it aloud over and over. We could hear owls hooting in the live oaks
many nights of the year, and my father could talk owl talk. Every time
he read the book he had to tell us what the owl says, in words long
drawn out from deep down: “I cook for myself. Who cooks for you-all?”
There are very few conversationalists to whom I had rather listen than
to a hoot owl, and often to this day his lonely and beautiful _who-ing_
takes me back to a Christmas of childhood, to a child’s book, and to my
father’s voice.

There were no commercial Santa Clauses in the country, so far as I
know. The only Santa Claus for us was my father. At an early age I
learned his identity, but that knowledge had no effect on the great
illusion, any more than knowing that a grown woman could not literally
live in a shoe had on the Mother Goose fact that there was an old woman
who lived in a shoe--and she had so many children she didn’t know what
to do.

My father cut the Christmas tree out in the pasture--a comely live oak
or maybe a “knock-away” (_anacahuita_)--and brought it in secretly.
After it was hung with gifts and lighted with little colored candles
and we had all gathered to behold it, Santa Claus would bound in, all
in white and red, as cheery in his ruddy complexion, reindeer country
manners, other-world talk, and contagious spirits as the Saint
Nicholas of “The Night before Christmas.” In disguised voice he called
out the names on the packages and added joy to the gift in the way he
presented it. Then he would disappear, and presently Papa would come in
and claim his own presents with as much eagerness as we had received
ours.

“The gift without the giver is bare.” Gifts can be manufactured, some
beautiful, many useful, but giving-out feelings can’t be--though they
can be cultivated. The love and cheer associated with Christmas will
always be the best thing about it. How often just a good word that
conveys the word-giver’s generosity of spirit enriches people! I
remember the “Merry Christmas, sir!” of a gray-haired woman scrubbing
stone steps at a college in Cambridge, England, during the war; and
recollection of her sturdy, cheerful, kind nature brightens my world. I
can hear my mother’s “Christmas Gift” or “Merry Christmas” as I write
these words. Whoever heard her greeting received a gift, for she meant
every syllable of it, felt every tone in it.

Sunrise, starlight, silence of dusk are never trite. Generous feelings
and cheering words are never trite. Merry Christmas!




2


In memory as well as in actuality, Christmas is the time for coming
home. Many a father lives for these homecomings of a scattered brood,
but it is the mothers who make them. Fay Yauger’s “I Remember” suggests
something of almost universal contrast:

  My father rode a horse
    And carried a gun;
  He swapped for a living
    And fought for his fun--
  I remember his spurs
    Agleam in the sun.

  My father was always
    Going somewhere--
  To rodeo, market,
    Or cattleman’s fair--
  I remember my mother,
    Her hand in the air.

My own mother has been dead five Christmases now. She was eighty-seven
years old when she died and had been a widow for twenty-eight of
those years. Maybe every mother is a matriarch; matriarchy was very
strongly pronounced in mine. She invariably wanted her children and
then grandchildren and great-grandchildren home at Christmas, and they
generally got there. If I live to be a hundred, at every Christmas
I’ll be remembering the brightness of her face, the eagerness of her
greeting, the love in all her conduct--including cooking.

[Illustration]

There was a kind of homecoming in our family--the returning of a
presence without the immediate returning of the person--that seems to
me to belong to Christmas, though it did not actually occur at that
season. Not long after the United States entered the First World War,
my mother and father had three sons and a daughter in the service.
The baby of the family, Martha, was still in school and so was Henry,
the youngest son, eighteen years old. My mother was thinking how she
would have him for a time at least, as a stay while she cared for a
sick husband and her own aged mother.

During World War I, millions of youths who joined the army volunteered.
One day Henry came to my mother and said, “Mama, I wish you wouldn’t
feel as you do about my enlisting. I want to go. I feel like a slacker
staying at home.”

“Son,” she replied--and it was never her nature to take all day to make
up her mind--“if you feel that way, go ahead and enlist. I’d rather
you’d go and never come back than stay home feeling like a slacker.”
Nor would it ever have occurred to her to try to pull wires to get him
into a soft place.

Henry joined the Marines and within a few weeks was across the
Atlantic. He was the only one of us four brothers who got a shot at
the Kaiser’s young Hitlers, but when he was fighting in the Argonne,
he wasn’t calling himself lucky, I guess. In October, 1918, Mama had a
letter from him and knew he was somewhere on the front.

November 11 and the Armistice came. I had been in France myself a few
weeks at that time. I can still hear and see the French peasants around
the artillery camp where I was stationed, going about all day saying to
each other and to any American soldier they met, “_Fini le guerre, fini
le guerre_--The war is finished, the war is finished.” Some had tears
in their eyes. They were in a kind of daze. They were in a transport as
if peace on earth and good will to all men had suddenly arrived to end
all wars. They were kind and simple people, like the masses of people
of all nations, whether red, white, black, yellow, or brown.

The Armistice had been declared and battling had ceased. November
passed, and no word from Henry. Had he survived? One by one the days of
December passed and Christmas came, little sister Martha the only child
at home, and no word of assurance from Henry and no dreaded word from
the War Department either. One by one the long nights of January and
the days made longer by waiting for a letter that did not come, passed.

Nearly every family in Beeville had a boy in the service. A few were
not coming back. Some had come. The others had been heard from.
Everybody knew that Henry’s whereabouts were unknown. The post office
had been so besieged over the telephone, every day and Sunday too, with
inquiries as to whether a letter had come from this boy or that, the
inquirers too eager to wait for the mail, that the postmaster ordered
the phone taken out. He was a good friend of my family.

One day in February, 1919, my mother answered the ring of the telephone
in her house. A post-office clerk was calling. The postmaster, he
explained, had sent him across the street to telephone from a store.
The postmaster wanted my mother and father to know that a letter had
just arrived--from Henry. Yes, from Henry, postmarked U. S. Army of
Occupation, in Germany.

With Mama and Papa in the house at this hour were an infant grandson,
lying in a baby buggy, and his mother, Elizabeth, my brother Lee’s
wife, Lee being in the Air Corps.

“I can go faster than anybody else,” Elizabeth cried.

[Illustration]

The post office was about four blocks away. As she tore out, Mama
and Papa followed as rapidly as they could, pushing the baby buggy.
There was no pavement to roll it over. The streets were sandy and
gullied, but the baby buggy was more than halfway to the post office
when Elizabeth met it coming back. She was running, hand stretched out
holding a letter that had already been torn from the envelope.

There in the middle of the street the little group read it through--a
father enfeebled beyond his years by a disease that was soon to carry
him off, a young kinswoman of eager sympathy, and a mother, still
wonderfully vigorous, who had said, “Go, son. I’d rather you’d go and
never come back than stay home feeling like a slacker.” I asked her
years later for her definition of bravery. “A brave person,” she came
back, with steel-spring energy, “is a person who is scared to death and
goes ahead anyway.”

I don’t remember now why no letter had come from Henry. Anyway, a
letter now brought him home in safety and changed the world for a few
people who had been waiting in utter anxiety.




3


This story, which is a true one, goes back to the days of oxen--a time
and a tempo in which people

    could stand beneath the boughs
  And stare as long as sheep and cows.

Many a man and boy, and many a woman and girl too, had a strong
affection for oxen reliabilities bearing such names as Old North and
Crump, Tom and Jerry, Bigfoot Wallace and Jim Bowie, Bully and Blackie.

Take Old Samson and the rollicky crew that drove the freight train
he helped pull. It was carrying supplies west from Jefferson on the
Louisiana line. The wagon to which Samson was yoked happened to be
loaded with bacon and barrelled whiskey. One day he went lame. The
next morning a bullwhacker suggested that he be shod with bacon rind.
Accordingly the rinds were cut off two sides of salt pork and put
on Samson for shoes. While he was being held, the ingenious whacker
suggested Samson would feel more at ease in the strange footgear if he
had a dram. A quart bottle was filled out of a barrel and poured down
Samson’s throat. “Well, sir, that old ox licked out his tongue and
smacked his lips and went against the yoke. For a while, with his new
bacon-rind slippers and morning dram, he was as frisky as a young colt.
He tried to pull the whole load by himself.”

Some drivers of oxen were more noted than the most noted oxen. Not
long after Texas joined the Confederacy, a youngster named Tim Cude
went from Live Oak County to enlist in the Army. Although he was only
sixteen years old, his way with oxen was a community wonder--especially
the power of his voice over them. It was a voice young and lush, but
strong, without the gosling quality. He did not charm the oxen by
whispering--horse-charmer style--in their ears.

Brindle and Whitey were his wheelers, Sam Houston and Davy Crockett,
the leaders. They were steers of the old-time Texas Longhorn breed,
and they could pull a log out of its bark. When Tim commanded them,
they would go to their places to be hitched to wagon or plow. Tim was
partial to Brindle, and when he put a hand over the ox’s head, the
ox would often show his pleasure by licking out his tongue. The four
oxen were the last inhabitants of the little Cude ranch that Tim told
good-by when he left to fight the Yankees. He was an only child. He
did not realize what emptiness he left behind him. He seldom wrote to
relieve it.

Months after Appomattox, his mother and father learned that he was
still alive at Lee’s surrender. Tim Cude was a mature man now, strong
and rangy with a full-grown beard. More months, then a year, then two
years, dragged by, and still Tim did not come home, and there was no
word from him. At first his father and mother talked with high hopes
of his coming. Then, gradually, they came to saying little, even to
each other, about his return. They still nursed a hope, but the heavy
conviction settled down on them that Tim must be among the many other
boys in gray who would never come back home. Their hope grew gray and
secret, without confidence. The days went by as slow as laboring oxen
walk.

In the late spring of 1867 Mr. Cude put a few beeves in a herd going
north. Six months later the owners of the herd returned and paid him
the first money he had seen in years. The aging couple needed the money
to buy necessities with, but Mr. Cude had a hard time persuading “mama”
to go with him down to Powderhorn on the coast for the purchases.
“Tim might come while we are gone,” was her only argument. Mr. Cude’s
argument that, if he came, he would stay until they got back, had
slight weight with her. She wanted to be there. Mr. Cude would not
argue, not even to himself, much less to her, that Tim would never
come, but he often reasoned gently that it was better for them both to
be resigned.

It was in December before Mrs. Cude finally consented to go. They took
a load of dry cow-hides with them, and as the oxen pulled them south at
the rate of about two miles an hour, they went over their plans again
and again for spending the money.

The plans cheered them. They would have plenty of real coffee now,
instead of tea from parched acorns and corn, and a new coffee grinder
that would do away with the labor of pounding the grains in a sack with
a hammer. Their old coffee mill was absolutely worn out. They would get
sacks of flour and have real flour bread. “You remember how Tim always
likes flour gravy,” Mrs. Cude said. She would have enough calico for
three new dresses and a sunbonnet, besides a tablecloth; he would have
new boots, new hat and breeches, and percale for sewing into shirts.
“I’ll get some blue for Tim,” Mrs. Cude said. There would be a new plow
for the cornpatch and lumber for a gallery to the frame house, so hot
in the summer.

It took them five or six days to get down to Powderhorn, and then
two days to buy everything and load the wagon. On the way back
Mrs. Cude kept wishing they’d make better time, but the four old
tortoise-stepping oxen never moved a foot faster. “Perhaps Tim came
home today,” Mrs. Cude would say at the evening camp. “I dreamed last
night that he came just after dark,” she’d say over the morning
campfire, always burning long before daybreak. In all the dragging
months, months adding themselves into years, no day had dawned, no
night had fallen, that she had not made some little extra preparation
for her boy’s coming home. In all the period of waiting, this was the
first time she had not been there to welcome him. As she approached the
waiting place now, the hopes of more than fourteen absent days and of
more than fourteen absent nights were all accumulated into one hope.
Perhaps Tim had come. Mr. Cude shared the hope, too, but it hurt him to
see “mama disappointed,” and he never encouraged day-dreams.

At last they were only six miles from home. Christmas was only three
days away. Then the oxen stalled in a mudhole at the crossing on La
Parra Creek. For an hour Mr. Cude struggled and worried with them,
trying to make them make the supreme pull. Mrs. Cude threw all her
strength on the spoke of one wheel. Finally Mr. Cude began the weary
business of unloading some of the freight and carrying it on his back
out of the creek.

Then suddenly they were aware of a man, dismounted from the horse
beside him, standing on the bank just ahead. Being down in the creek,
they could not have seen his approach. His frame, though lank, was
well filled out, his face all bearded, his clothes nondescript. In his
posture was something of the soldier. Nearly all Southern men had,
in those days, been soldiers. For a second he seemed to be holding
something back; then he gave a hearty greeting that was cordially
responded to.

“Those look like mighty good oxen,” the young man said, coming down, as
any stranger in that country at that time would come to help anybody in
a tight.

“They are good oxen, but they won’t pull this wagon out now,” Mr. Cude
answered. “I guess they’re getting old like us. We been working them
since before the war.”

The stranger had moved around so that he was very near the wheel oxen,
which he faced, instead of the driver and his wife. His hand was on
Brindle’s head, between the long rough horns, and the old ox, whose
countenance was the same whether in a bog hole or a patch of spring
tallow weed, licked out his tongue.

“I believe I can make these old boys haul the wagon out,” the man said.

“They wouldn’t do any better for a stranger than for their master,” Mr.
Cude answered.

“There’s only one person who could get them to pull,” added Mrs. Cude.
“That’s our boy who went to the war.”

“Did he know oxen?” the young man asked out of his beard.

“Oh, yes, and they knew him. They liked him.”

Then for a little while there was silence.

As Mr. Cude began drawing up his rawhide whip, again the offerer of
help, pleading now, asked for a chance to try his hand.

“Very well,” Mr. Cude agreed slowly, “but every time you try to make
’em pull and they don’t budge the wagon, they’re that much harder to
get against the yoke the next time.”

[Illustration]

The young man asked the names of the oxen and got them. Then he took
the long whip, not to lash the animals--for that was not the whip’s
function--but to pop it. He swung it lightly and tested the popper
three or four times, as if getting back the feel of something long
familiar that had been laid aside. Then he curved the fifteen feet of
tapering plaited rawhide through the air--and the ringing crack made
the sky brighter. At the same time he began calling to the oxen to come
on and pull out. He talked to Brindle and Whitey and Sam Houston and
Davy Crockett harder than a Negro crapshooter talking to his bones.

The oxen, without a jerk, lay slowly, steadily, mightily, into the
yokes. The wheels began to turn. The whip popped again, like a crack of
lightning in the sky, and the strong voice rose, pleading, encouraging,
confident, dominating.

The oxen were halfway up the bank now. They pulled on out, but nobody
was talking to them any longer. No welcome of feast and fatted calf
ever overwhelmed a prodigal son like that, initiated by four faithful
old oxen, which Tim Cude received from his mother and father on the
banks of an insignificant creek in a wilderness of mesquite. All the
gray in the world was suddenly wiped out by sunshine, and all the
mockingbirds between the San Antonio River and the Rio Grande seemed to
be singing at once.

The oxen, silent and slow, kept on pulling down the road.




[Illustration: James Bowie and the Bowie Knife]




[Illustration]


Through long centuries of warring, certain weapons of the Old
World, like King Arthur’s “Excalibur” and Siegmund’s great sword
“Gram,” became the subjects of legends and of songs that have made
them immortal. Their solitary counterpart in the New World, before
six-shooter and law-abiding habits supplanted its use, was the Bowie
knife. The knife’s origin is wrapped in fable as fantastic as that
recounting how the dwarf smiths forged for the old Norse gods; its use
is memorialized in a cycle of dark and bloody legends yet told all over
the Southwest. And certainly the Bowie knife was once as important to
the frontiersman as a steady eye.

It was the rule to “use a knife and save powder and lead.” The
Bowie knife was the best possible knife to use, and knife throwing
and thrusting were arts to be excelled in, as well as shooting and
wrestling. Indeed, many frontiersmen regarded any other weapon than the
knife, for work in close quarters, as “fit only for the weakly.” Bowie
himself, it is claimed, could juggle a number of knives in the air at
the same time and at twenty paces send one through a small target of
thick wood.

For dozens of purposes the Bowie knife was “as handy as a shirt
pocket.” Its hard bone or horn handle was often used as a kind of
pestle to grind coffee beans. The blade, sometimes as heavy as a
Mexican machete, served to hack limbs from trees and to cut underbrush,
as well as to dress and skin game. Tradition has it that in the battle
of San Jacinto the Texans killed more Mexicans with the Bowie knife
than with bullets. An Englishman named Hooten, who visited Texas a few
years after the battle and straightway wrote a book, said: “I have
myself seen skulls of Mexicans brought in from the battleground of
San Jacinto that were cleft nearly through the thickest part of the
bone behind, evidently at one blow, and with sufficient force to throw
out extensive cracks, like those of starred glass.”

[Illustration]

Of all the characters connected with pioneer history in the Southwest,
James Bowie comes nearer being unadulterated legend than any other.
He did nothing really great or constructive; yet his name has
probably been more widely popularized than that of the truly great
and constructive founder of the Texas Republic, Stephen F. Austin.
He affected little, if at all, the destiny of a nation, and merely a
scrap of his paper survives; yet the stories that sprang up about him
are second in number only to those about the voluble and spectacular
Sam Houston. He is remembered popularly for three things: first, his
brave death in the Alamo, fighting for Texas independence; second, his
supposed connection with a lost Spanish mine on the San Saba River,
which came to bear Bowie’s name, and which today, after thousands of
men over a period close to a hundred years have vainly sought to find
it, is yet the object of ardent search; third, the knife which bears
his name--and which, to many people, symbolizes his character.

All three of these claims to remembrance are wrapped in legend. The
traditional tales, some of them truly extraordinary, centering around
the Lost Bowie Mine, would, if compiled, fill a volume. History is
clear as to Bowie’s part in the Alamo, but the best stories about him
there do not get into documented histories. Nor do the tales of how he
succored abused slaves, took the part of bullied preachers, and rescued
wronged women. But our subject is the Bowie knife.

The known facts about James Bowie’s early life are that he was born in
Tennessee in 1795, two years later than his distinguished brother Rezin
P. Bowie, and that in 1802 he came with his parents and their numerous
progeny to Louisiana. The name Bowie at that time was already more than
a century old in Maryland and had been known for two generations in
Virginia and South Carolina, the several branches of the family having
shot out from a stout clan of Scottish Highlanders. The male members
of it--hard riding, hard-headed, well propertied, decently educated,
contentious in politics, and ready to die in adherence to the code
of the Cavaliers--generally deserved the epithet given to them, “the
fighting Bowies.”

The pair that reared James were equal to holding their own in a
wilderness where turbulent men were made more turbulent by the
confusion of land claims following the Louisiana Purchase. On one
occasion Rezin Bowie, Sr., father of James, in defending his land
against a gang of squatters, killed one of them. He was arrested,
charged with manslaughter, and put in jail to await trial. Mrs. Bowie,
accompanied by a slave, rode on horseback to the jail, demanded
entrance, and entered. In a few minutes she and her husband reappeared,
each armed with a brace of pistols. While the jailer retreated, they
mounted the horses in waiting and rode away. It is not recorded that
Rezin Bowie, Sr., was again molested. Years later when this wife and
mother was told how her son had been killed by Mexicans in the Alamo,
she calmly remarked, “I’ll wager no wounds were found in his back.”

In time, James Bowie and his brother Rezin came to own and operate a
great sugar plantation on Bayou Lafourche, called Arcadia. Meantime,
John J., a third brother, had moved to Arkansas and established a large
plantation.

[Illustration]

Jim Bowie was a man of surpassing vigor, of headlong energy, and of
great ambition to lead. He was six feet tall and all muscle. He roped
and rode giant alligators for fun. Generally polite and courteous, in
anger he appeared “like an enraged tiger.” He was somehow connected
with Dr. Long’s filibustering schemes against Mexico, and with one or
more of his brothers he seems to have carried on an extensive business
in slave smuggling. The Bowies are said to have bought blacks from
the pirate Lafitte on Galveston Island at a dollar a pound. On one
occasion, says the historian Thrall, Jim Bowie, while driving ninety of
his purchases through the swamps of Louisiana, lost the entire band.
Thereafter he prepared himself against a similar disaster by wearing
“three or four knives,” so that he could transfix any Negro that tried
to run away. Jerking a knife was quicker by far than reloading a horse
pistol at the muzzle. “Big Jim,” as they called him, showed the “knife
men” among Lafitte’s crew several things in the art of knife throwing.

And this brings us to our theme--a theme concerning which history must
stand abashed before the riot of legend. Who made the first Bowie
knife? How did it originate?

[Illustration]

According to an unpublished letter, written in 1890 by John S. Moore,
grandnephew of James Bowie, and preserved among the historical archives
of The University of Texas, the original knife was modeled as a hunting
knife by Rezin Bowie, Sr., and wrought by his own blacksmith, Jesse
Cliffe. Some time later Jim Bowie had a “difficulty” with one Major
Morris Wright, in which a bullet from Wright’s pistol was checked by
a silver dollar in Bowie’s vest pocket. While Wright was in the act
of shooting, Bowie “pulled down” on him, but his pistol snapped and
the two foes parted, expecting to meet another day. When Jim told his
father of this, the old gentleman got out his prized hunting knife and
presented it to his son with these laconic words: “This will never
snap.”

In the “Sandbar Duel” that followed, the knife fully met all
expectations. This duel was in reality a free-for-all fight that took
place among twelve men who met on a sandbar in the Mississippi River
near Natchez, September 19, 1827. In it two men were killed and three
badly wounded. Bowie was down, shot in four places and cut in five,
when his mortal enemy, Major Wright, rushed upon him, exclaiming, “Damn
you, you have killed me.” Bowie raised himself up and stabbed Wright
to the heart. At once Bowie’s knife became famous and copies of it were
widely disseminated.

According to notes kept by another scion of the Bowie family, Dr. J.
Moore Soniat du Fosset, of New Orleans, now deceased, it was Rezin P.
Bowie, the brother of James, who devised the knife. The occasion for it
arose thus:

The Bowie brothers were very fond of riding wild cattle down--a sport
popular among planters of Louisiana at the time. There were two ways
of dealing with the maverick animals. One was to shoot them from
horseback, as sportsmen on the plains shot buffaloes; the other was
to ride against them and stab them with a large _couteau de chasse_.
Sometimes the cattle were lassoed and then stabbed. The chase with
knife and lasso was wilder and more exciting than the chase with pistol
or rifle. Hence the Bowies preferred it.

One day while Rezin P. was thrusting his knife into a ferocious bull,
the animal lunged in such a way as to draw the blade through the
hunter’s hand, making a severe wound.

After having his hand dressed, Rezin called the plantation blacksmith,
Jesse Cliffe, and told him that he must make a knife that would not
slip from a man’s grasp. Using a pencil in his left hand, he awkwardly
traced on paper a blade some ten inches long and two inches broad at
its widest part, the handle to be strong and well protected from the
blade by guards. The model having been settled upon, Rezin gave the
smith a large file of the best quality of steel and told him to make
the knife out of that. With fire and hammer the smith wrought the
weapon--just one. It proved to be so serviceable in hunting, and Rezin
came to prize it so highly that for a long time he kept it, when he was
not wearing it, locked in his desk.

Then one day Jim Bowie told his brother how his life had been
jeopardized by the snapping of a pistol while it was pointed at a man
firing on him. After hearing the story and learning how the final
reckoning between the enemies was yet to be made, Rezin unlocked the
desk, took out his prized personal possession, and handed it to his
brother with these words: “Here, Jim, take ‘Old Bowie.’ She never
misses fire.”

Another story has it that in preparation for the “Sandbar Duel” Jim
Bowie himself took a fourteen-inch file to a cutler in New Orleans,
known as Pedro. Pedro had learned his trade in Toledo, where the finest
swords in all Spain were forged; and all his skill went into the making
of a blade which was to be, in Bowie’s words, “fit to fight for a man’s
life with.”

When in doubt, go to the encyclopedia. This is what the _Encyclopedia
Americana_ (1928) sets forth: “Colonel James Bowie is said to have had
his sword broken down to within about twenty inches of the hilt in a
fight with some Mexicans, but he found that he did such good execution
with his broken blade that he equipped all his followers with a similar
weapon”--the Bowie knife.

But let us not be too rash in drawing conclusions. Arkansas is yet to
be heard from, and Arkansas has better right to speak on the subject
than any encyclopedia. The Bowie knife used to be commonly known as
the “Arkansas toothpick,” and Arkansas is sometimes referred to as
“the Toothpick State.” Arkansians certainly knew their toothpicks. The
very spring that Bowie died in the Alamo, Arkansas became a state,
and fittingly enough history records that the members of the first
Legislature used, after adjournment in the cool of the evening, to
take their knives and pistols and repair to a grove hard by, there to
practice throwing and shooting at the trees.

Some members of the Legislature were in fine practice. The Speaker of
the House was John Wilson, sometimes known as “Horse Ears” from the
fact that when he was excited--whether by love, humor, or anger--his
ears worked up and down like those of an aroused horse. One of his
political enemies in the House was Major J. J. Anthony. When a bill
relating to bounties on wolf scalps came up Anthony arose and, in the
course of his remarks, made a cutting allusion to Speaker Wilson.

With ears working and quivering “in a horrific manner,” Wilson leaped
from his chair, drew a Bowie knife, and started toward his antagonist.
Anthony was waiting for “Horse Ears” with his own knife drawn. A
legislator thrust a chair between them. Each seized a rung in his left
hand and went to slashing with his right. Anthony cut one of Wilson’s
hands severely and in the scuffle lost his knife. Wilson, thereupon,
made short work of his enemy. In court Wilson was triumphantly cleared
of the charge of murder, and at a meeting of the Legislature a few
years later drew his Bowie knife on another member. Those were the days
when the Bowie knife governed in Arkansas.

So it is not without reason and just basis for pride that Arkansas
insists on having originated the Bowie knife. It has already been said
that John J. Bowie established a plantation in that state. A former
Arkansas judge, William F. Pope, maintains that Rezin P. Bowie once
came to Washington, Arkansas, and engaged an expert smith named Black
to make a hunting knife after a pattern that he, Bowie, had whittled
out of the top of a cigar box. “He told the smith he wanted a knife
that would disjoint the bones of a bear or deer without gapping or
turning the edge of the blade. Black undertook the job and turned
out the implement afterward known as the Bowie knife. The hilt was
elaborately ornamented with silver designs. Black’s charge for the work
was $10, but Bowie was so pleased with it that he gave the maker $10
more.

“I do not hesitate to make the statement,” concludes Judge Pope, “that
no _genuine_ Bowie knives have ever been made outside the State of
Arkansas.... Many imitations have been attempted, but they are not
Bowie knives.”

Despite such strong assertions, it would appear that Judge Pope based
his judgment on a false premise. The classic Arkansas story comes
from Dan W. Jones, governor of Arkansas from 1897 to 1901. According
to Governor Jones, the James Black, who alone made the only “genuine”
Bowie knife, also designed it. Black was born in New Jersey and,
after having served as apprentice to a Philadelphia silver-plate
manufacturer, came South in 1818, settling that year at Washington,
Hempstead County, Arkansas.

Here he found employment with Shaw, the village blacksmith. Shaw was
an important man with high ambitions for his daughters. Consequently,
when Anne fell in love with the young smith, only a hired hand, Shaw
objected. The young people married nevertheless, and James Black set up
a smithy of his own.

He specialized in making knives, and very soon they had won a
reputation. Governor Jones’s story continues:

[Illustration]

“About 1831 James Bowie came to Washington and gave Black an order
for a knife, furnishing a pattern and desiring it to be made within
the next sixty or ninety days, at the end of which time he would call
for it. Black made the knife according to Bowie’s pattern. He knew
Bowie well and had a high regard for him as a man of good taste as
well as of unflinching courage. He had never made a knife that suited
his own taste in point of shape, and he concluded that this would be
a good opportunity to make one. Consequently, after completing the
knife ordered by Bowie, he made another. When Bowie returned he showed
both the knives to him, giving him his choice at the same price. Bowie
promptly selected Black’s pattern.

“Shortly after this Bowie became involved in a difficulty with three
desperadoes, who assaulted him with knives. He killed them all with the
knife Black had made. After this, whenever anyone ordered a knife from
Black he ordered it made ‘like Bowie’s’ which finally was shortened
into ‘Make me a Bowie knife.’ Thus this famous weapon acquired its name.

“Other men made knives in those days, and they are still being made,
but no one has ever made ‘the Bowie knife’ except James Black. Its
chiefest value was in its temper. Black undoubtedly possessed the
Damascus secret. It came to him mysteriously and it died with him in
the same way. He often told men that no one had taught him the secret
and that it was impossible for him to tell how he acquired it.”

The death of the secret is a part of the story. About 1838 Black’s wife
died. Not long thereafter Black himself was confined to his bed by a
fever. While he was down, his father-in-law, who had all along been
jealous of Black’s growing reputation, met up with him and beat him
over the head with a stick. Probably he would have killed him had not
Black’s dog seized Shaw by the throat. As it was, inflammation set up
in Black’s eyes and he was threatened with blindness. As soon as he
had strength enough to travel he set out for expert treatment. A quack
doctor in Cincinnati made him stone-blind.

Black returned to Arkansas to find his little property gone and himself
an object of charity. A Doctor Jones, father of the future Governor
Jones, gave him a home. When Doctor Jones died, the blind man went to
live with the son.

“Time and again,” recalls Governor Jones, “when I was a boy he said to
me that, notwithstanding his great misfortune, God had blessed him in a
rare manner by giving him such a good home and that he would repay it
all by disclosing to me his secret of tempering steel when I should
arrive at maturity.

“On the first day of May, 1870, his seventieth birthday, he said to me
that he was getting old and could not in the ordinary course of nature
expect to live a great while longer; and that, if I would get pen, ink
and paper, he would communicate it to me and I could write it down.

“I brought the writing material and told him I was ready. He said, ‘In
the first place’--and then stopped suddenly and commenced rubbing his
brow with the fingers of his right hand. He continued this for some
minutes, and then said, ‘Go away and come back again in an hour.’

“I went out of the room, but remained where I could see him, and not
for one moment did he take his fingers from his brow or change his
position. At the expiration of the hour I went into the room and spoke
to him. Without changing his position or movement, he said, ‘Go out
again and come back in another hour.’

“Upon my speaking to him at the expiration of the second hour he again
said, ‘Go out once more and come back in another hour.’ Again I went
out and watched. The old man sat there, his frame sunken, immobile, his
only movement the constant rubbing of his brow with the fingers of his
right hand.

“When I came in and spoke to him at the expiration of the third hour he
burst into a flood of tears and said:

“‘My God, my God, it has all gone from me! All these years I have
accepted the kindness of these good people in the belief that I could
repay it all with this legacy, and now when I attempt to do it I
cannot. Daniel, there were ten or twelve processes. When I told you to
get pen, ink and paper they were all fresh in my mind, but they are all
gone now. My God, my God, I have put it off too long!’

“I looked at him in awe and wonder. The skin from his forehead had been
completely rubbed away by his fingers. His sightless eyes were filled
with tears and his white face was the very picture of grief and despair.

“For a little more than two years longer he lived on, but he was ever
after an imbecile. He lies buried in the old graveyard at Washington,
and with him lies buried the wonderful secret of the genuine Bowie
knife steel.”

Texas, too, has asserted her claim to being the place where Bowie
originated the knife. There are other stories--many of them. However
they may contradict each other, the preponderance of evidence goes to
show that the knife used by Jim Bowie in the “Sandbar Duel” of 1827
set the fashion for Bowie knives. It was duplicated in many places--by
solitary smiths over a vast pioneer country, by a factory in Sheffield,
England. It was improved upon and elaborated upon, and until the
six-shooter supplanted it, it was the chief weapon employed to settle
personal difficulties over a vast territory of the South and West where
pioneer conditions prevailed.

The exact proportions of the original Bowie knife probably never will
be known, though the blade was undoubtedly about ten inches long. The
_ideal_ Bowie knife was forged from the best steel procurable. It was
differentiated from other knives by having more curve to the blade near
the point, by having a heavier handle--often of horn--and by having
handle, blade, and guards all so well balanced that the knife could be
cast a maximum distance with the most deadly effect.

[Illustration]

How many men Bowie killed with the blade that saved his life on the
Mississippi sandbar we do not know. Rezin P. Bowie flatly affirmed that
the knife never was used more than the once for other than hunting
purposes. Maybe Bowie used at other times an improved model, though, as
we shall see, he was passionately devoted to “Old Bowie.” Estimates of
the number of men he stabbed--exclusive of his work in the Alamo--vary
from sixteen to nineteen. It is significant that Rezin was careful to
make a distinction between a “difficulty” and a “duel”; consequently
his flat assertion that neither he nor James “ever had a _duel_ with
any person whatsoever” is to be taken technically.

The technically trained Judge Pope, already quoted, overruled, we
might say, Rezin’s definition--or assertion. “Several months ago,”
he records, “I met a descendant of the Bowies who informed me that
his great-uncle James once fought a desperate duel with a Mexican
with knives, the combatants, face to face and within mutual striking
distance, sitting on a log to which the stout leather breeches each
wore were securely nailed.”

Bowie was as gallant as he was gory. One time, so another yarn goes,
he met in Natchez-Under-the-Hill a young man named Lattimore, whom he
recognized as the son of a much esteemed friend. Young Lattimore had
sold a large amount of cotton and in a faro game was being cheated by
“Bloody Sturdivant,” a notorious gambler.

“Young man,” said Bowie, “you don’t know me, but your father does.
Here, let me take your hand.”

In a short time Bowie exposed the cheat. Then he won back the money
Lattimore had lost and gave it to him with the advice to gamble no
more. “Bloody Sturdivant,” meantime, ignorant of who his opponent was,
had become so incensed that he challenged Bowie to a duel, proposing
that they lash their left hands together and fight with knives. Bowie
accepted, at the first stroke disabled the right arm of his antagonist,
and then forbore to take his life.

Duels of this character between men lashed together were not exactly
everyday affairs, but the fact that they occurred at all bespeaks the
spirit of the times--and the popularity of the Bowie knife. In the
region of Texas below San Antonio they were called “Helena duels” from
the fact that the town of Helena fostered them rather frequently.
Sometimes they were known as “Mexican fights.”

More dramatic, perhaps, and certainly as chilling to the imagination,
was another form of duel that Bowie is said to have inaugurated. He
was challenged, so the story goes, and had the privilege of arranging
the combat. He stipulated that the fight should take place at night
in a dark room into which the combatants, stripped to the waist,
barefooted--so that sound would not reveal movement--and armed with
Bowie knives, were to be locked.

In the dead of the night they were accompanied to the appointed room
in a deserted house. They entered. The door was locked. The seconds
outside listened for long minutes without hearing a sound. Then they
heard a scuffle, accompanied by a click of steel, a moan, and a voice
crying, “Come in.” By the light of a lantern Bowie was seen standing in
a pool of blood, the other man dead.

Bowie must have lain awake nights thinking up novel ways in which to
exercise his knife. It is humiliating to record that in all likelihood
he did not think up what might be denominated “the grave duel”--the
most exquisite form that hand-to-hand combat with knives could assume.

While the noted Clay Allison “of the Washita,” one of the swiftest,
boldest, most bizarre and humorous gunfighters of the Southwest, was
in Texas along in the early 1870’s he became embroiled, so old-timers
tell, with a neighboring ranchman. The two men agreed to fight it
out, and the coolness and originality that Clay Allison displayed in
planning the details of the fight would have delighted Jim Bowie.

“It was agreed,” Maurice G. Fulton relates the story, “that a
grave should be prepared of the usual length and width, but to the
exceptional depth of seven or eight feet. The two men were to strip
themselves to the waist and then seat themselves inside the grave at
the two ends, each grasping in his right hand a Bowie knife. At a given
signal they were to rise and start fighting. This they were to keep
up until one or the other was dead. A final stipulation required the
survivor then and there to cover the dead one with the earth removed in
digging the grave.”

Clay Allison, of the Washita, threw in the dirt.

Bowie still had his knife at the Alamo--at least a Bowie knife. Dallas
T. Herndon, Arkansas historian, says that he died in the Alamo “with
the knife made by James Black clasped in his hand.” Others have said
that around Bowie’s cot--for he was ill--was a heap of Mexicans whose
ribs had been tickled by the knife. Among the relics in the Alamo
itself at present is a not very formidable specimen of cutlery that
some man by the name of Bowie donated a few years ago as the original
Bowie knife. The Witte Museum, in San Antonio, has another knife that
is supposed to have been owned by Bowie and presented by him to a
friend. (Bowie seems to have been fond of making presents of the knife,
very much as an author presents his own books.) One tradition is that
Bowie gave the original knife to the great actor, Forrest. No doubt
Bowie admired actors. Another report has it that one of the Louisiana
descendants of Rezin P. Bowie lost the original knife in a boggy river
some forty years ago.

James Bowie died before the knife that bears his name was supplanted by
the six-shooter. It is generally said that Captain Jack Hays, of the
Texas Rangers, at the battle of the Pedernales with Comanche Indians,
about 1842, first fully demonstrated the superiority of the Colt’s
revolver over all other weapons in close combat. It was about this
time that Robert M. Williamson, a lawyer and one of the most singular
characters among the highly individualized men of Austin’s colonies,
made a gesture that signified the waning dominance of the Bowie knife.

The President of the Republic of Texas commissioned Judge Williamson
to go to a certain county and there hold a term of court. No court
had been held in the county for years; the citizens were principally
engaged in feuds and wanted no legal meddling. Just before court was
to be convened, a mass meeting of the feudists adopted a resolution
declaring that no court should be held. When Williamson took his
seat on the bench, a lawyer who had been deputized to set forth the
resolution arose and read it aloud. The courtroom was crowded with
armed men. After the lawyer had concluded and taken his seat, the judge
asked him if he could cite any statute to warrant the adjournment of
court for any such reasons as he had set forth.

Coolly enough, the lawyer again rose, pulled out his long Bowie knife,
laid it on the table, and said: “This is the statute that governs in
such cases.”

At this the fiery Williamson leaped from his chair, drew one of the new
Colt’s revolvers, pointed it at the lawyer, and roared: “And this is
the constitution that overrides the statute. Open court, Mr. Sheriff,
and call the witnesses in the first case.”

Whether they be literally true or largely the product of
imagination--and many of them must be fabrications--the tales that
have come down regarding the origin of the Bowie knife and of its use
by Bowie and other frontiersmen reflect, in a phrase from Henry Adams,
“what society liked to see enacted on its theater of life.” Indeed,
they reflect not only what society “liked to see enacted” but what
was enacted. As truly as documented history they reveal a time and a
people.




Acknowledgments


Most of the third story in “Christmas and Remembrance”--about Tim Cude
and the oxen--first appeared in _The Longhorns_, published by Little,
Brown and Company, Boston, 1941. The publishers have kindly granted
permission to use the story in this volume.

“James Bowie and the Bowie Knife” first appeared in the _Southwest
Review_, Vol. XVI, April, 1931.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed.

  The cover image for this eBook was created by the transcriber using
    the original cover and is entered into the public domain.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF CHRISTMAS AND THE
BOWIE KNIFE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
